DMP Template: NSF-BIO: Biological Sciences (2018-)Institution: Arizona State UniversityDMP Name: Indigenous/Aboriginal Health and Activism#1.	Data Collected, Formats, and StandardsObservational qualitative data such as text and audiovisual will be collected from Indigenous/Aboriginal People living in Arizona and Hawaiʻi. IRB approval and informed consent forms will be provided and explained to participants about the research project and to obtain permission to  use and record their cultural knowledge and Indigenous/Aboriginal nations’ cultural knowledge. Interviews will be conducted with American Indian and Native Hawaiian individuals about how their health is impacted by activism. An estimated timeline of conducting interviews will be from January 2019-May 2019. An ideal number of interviews will be 15 American Indian and 15 Native Hawaiian individuals. The interviews will be recorded on a handheld recorder and notes written in a notebook. The interviews will transcribed and saved as a word document file or plain text file (.txt) . All transcribed data will then be transferred into MAXQDA for analysis. Deductive coding will be used to analyze the data. #2.	Data Storage and PreservationThe data will be stored on password protected word document and plain text files.  The MAXQDA file will also be password protected. It will be stored on a laptop and backed up on an external hard drive. Participants will each get a copy of their own transcribed interview as a word document to ensure they have access to their own information, for transparency, and to make any needed corrections. #3.	Dissemination MethodsAt this time only the data results will be disseminated through publications and as part of the author’s PhD defense. Copies of the data and results will be disseminated to all participants as a word document.#4.	Policies for Data Sharing and Public AccessThe data itself will not be shared publicly and open access will not be allowed due to privacy, confidentiality, and intellectual property rights of the participants and their Indigenous/Aboriginal nations. The  data is sensitive and informed consent forms will include this information for the participant. The author, participants, and their Indigenous/Aboriginal nations retain rights to this data. The short term data storage plan will be to archive the word document and plain text files daily on a laptop and an external hard drive.#5.	Roles and ResponsibilitiesParticipants: Danelle Cooper (Arizona State University) will be the primary investigator on the research project. Danelle will ensure compliance with IRB Protocol and the Data Management Plan. She will work with participants to ensure their privacy, confidentiality, and intellectual property rights as well as their Indigenous/Aboriginal Nations’ rights are protected. 